docs: dataset generation and openvla fine-tuning pipeline description (#110)
RobotecAI/rai: docs/manipulation.md

# AI-powered robotics manipulation

## Currently planned and developed pipeline

![pipeline](imgs/openvla_diagram.gif)

### **Automated Dataset Generation**

> We aim to automatically generate a dataset with various scenes and robot's actions to fine-tune [openVLA](https://openvla.github.io/) - a state-of-the-art Open-Source Vision-Language-Action Model for generalist robot manipulation policies. We aim to leverage our **LLM-powered Scene Generator** enabling easy generation of various scenarios based on user prompts.

Reviewer: As well as other VLA models in the future. Not sure about openvla being sota atm. Even if it is, it will soon be out of date information.

Reviewer 2: I would say OpenVLA is beyond state of art in terms of principles of operation and generalization, which doesn't mean it's the newest / best there is. Either way, it is not state of art ;D

**LLM-powered Scene Generator** generates the Python code that creates the prompted scene and makes objects make desired actions. We use the most efficient [Claude models](https://www.anthropic.com/claude) (currently Claude 3.5 Sonnet). The tool is integrated with [O3DE - an open source, real-time 3D engine](https://o3de.org/industries/robotics-and-simulations/).

![manipulation_examples](imgs/manipulation_demo.gif)

### OpenVLA fine-tuning and inference

We integrated openVLA model with [O3DE Engine](https://o3de.org/industries/robotics-and-simulations/) and [ROS2](https://github.com/ros2) to efficiently evaluate the fine-tuning results on simulated robot. Our Robotic Arm Manipulation Demo is available [here](https://github.com/RobotecAI/rai-manipulation-demo). Instructions on how to run the demo will be released soon.

## Issues and challenges

> We are intensively working on determining the proper dataset size and diversity to optimally generalize the model for our needs. As openVLA is a very recent state-of-the-art publication, intuitions regarding the fine-tuning of this model are only just being developed.

Reviewer: Same

# AI-powered robotics manipulation

## Overview

> Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models represent a novel approach to controlling robots, offering significant potential to automate and generalize robotic operations. We are working on integrating this approach with RAI to further extend RAI's versatility. The upcoming manipulation demo will showcase the currently developed functionalities of RAI enhanced with VLA models. Users will be able to instruct a robotic arm to perform specific tasks, such as organizing scattered toys, with a single command prompt.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The upcoming manipulation demo will showcase the currently developed functionalities of RAI enhanced with Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models. You will be able to instruct a robotic arm to perform complex tasks, such as organizing scattered toys, with a single command prompt. It is also meant to showcase how a more generalist agent cooperates with a specialized model.

VLA models represent a novel approach to controlling robots, offering significant potential to automate and generalize robotic operations. We are working on integrating this approach with RAI to further extend RAI's versatility.
```

## Currently planned and developed pipeline

![pipeline](imgs/openvla_diagram.gif)

### **Automated Dataset Generation**

> We aim to automatically generate a dataset with various scenes and robot's actions to fine-tune VLA (Vision-Language-Action) models for generalist robot manipulation policies. We aim to leverage our [**LLM-powered Scene Generator**](https://github.com/RobotecAI/o3de-genai-gems) enabling easy generation of various scenarios based on user prompts.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To automatically generate a dataset with various scenes and robot's actions to fine-tune VLA (Vision-Language-Action) models for generalist robot manipulation policies, we leverage our [**LLM-powered Scene Generator**](https://github.com/RobotecAI/o3de-genai-gems) enabling easy generation of various scenarios based on user prompts.
```

> **LLM-powered Scene Generator** generates the Python code that creates the prompted scene and makes objects make desired actions. We use the most efficient [Claude models](https://www.anthropic.com/claude) (currently Claude 3.5 Sonnet). The tool is integrated with [O3DE - an open source, real-time 3D engine](https://o3de.org/industries/robotics-and-simulations/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**LLM-powered Scene Generator** is an [Open 3D Engine (O3DE)](https://o3de.org/industries/robotics-and-simulations/) Gem that generates the Python code that creates the prompted scene and makes objects make desired actions. We use the most efficient [Claude models](https://www.anthropic.com/claude) (currently Claude 3.5 Sonnet).
```

![manipulation_examples](imgs/manipulation_demo.gif)

### OpenVLA fine-tuning and inference

> We integrated [openVLA](https://openvla.github.io/) model with O3DE Engine and ROS2 to efficiently evaluate the fine-tuning results on simulated robot. Our Robotic Arm Manipulation Demo is available [here](https://github.com/RobotecAI/rai-manipulation-demo). Instructions on how to run the demo will be released soon.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We integrated [openVLA](https://openvla.github.io/) model with O3DE and ROS 2. Our work on Robotic Arm Manipulation Demo is public and available [here](https://github.com/RobotecAI/rai-manipulation-demo). Instructions on how to run the demo will be released soon.
```

## Issues and challenges

> We are intensively working on determining the proper dataset size and diversity to optimally generalize the model for our needs. As VLA models are quite novel approach, intuitions regarding the fine-tuning of such models are only just being developed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We are investigating optimal dataset size and diversity to generalize the model for our needs. As VLA models are quite novel approach, intuitions regarding the fine-tuning of such models are only just being developed.
```
